---
title: Self-Supervised Learning from Images with a Joint-Embedding Predictive Architecture
authors: Mahmoud Assran et al.
arxiv: 2301.08243
tags: [self-supervised, jepa, vision]
status: published
template: freeform
---

> This is a self supervised paradigm, better go study more about what self supervision means and how it's different compared to supervised learning (what we do most of the time). Here's a wiki defn:

> **The input data is typically augmented or transformed in a way that creates pairs of related samples, where one sample serves as the input, and the other is used to formulate the supervisory signal.**

* The jepa series is probably the biggest example of "world models are complicated" and "damn ts actually works". JEPA, also stands for joint embedding predictive architecture is a very fancy name given by a very arrogant yet brilliant man to a family of models that want to effectively solve tasks while having internal world models. (sorry dr yann)
* Apparently in vision, there are 2 dominant approaches to training good semantic representations:
  * Invariance based (SimCLR, DINO, MoCo) where we push the embeddings of augmented views of an image together. According to claude: **The hope is, if the model learns to produce similar embeddings for two distorted views of the same image, it must have learned something about the content of the image rather than its surface appearance.**
    * Problem: the model doesn't learn the augmentations, it just learns just the core content. Which is bad because we spend so much time hand crafting the augmentations.
  * Generative masked methods (MAE) that learn to predicts pixels when given a masked image.
    * Problem: the model has to operate in the pixel space, which doesn't scale nicely when we want to predict large aah patches.
* Now that we've established that all the methods are poo poo, let's talk about what yann wants to do here - operating entirely in the latent space, and letting the model learn the features as is without any invariance towards augmentations.
* Sooo, we divide the image into N patches. And we allow some patches to be context patches, while other patches should be target patches that the model has to predict. They use a vision transformer for encoding the context, target and predictors.
  * And here's the slightly fun part, to cover the entire image (ig?) they also go one step further-instead of sampling the target blocks once, they sample it M times. So for one context patch they can have >1 target patches.
  * Of course, they want to ensure that there's no overlap between the target and context patches. So they check for those.
  * The predictor $g\_\phi$ takes as input the output of the context encoder along with the mask for the target encoder to predict the target patches. We apply the predictor M times, for M target patches, using it's own mask.
  * The loss function is $L\_2$ distance between the predicted patch level representations and the actual patch level representations: $$L \= \frac{1}{M} \sum D(s\_{ip}, s\_i)$$&#x20;
  * yes, that's pretty much it about the model.

> The parameters of the predictor, ϕ, and context encoder, θ,are learned through gradient-based optimization, while the parameters of the target encoder ¯θ are updated via an exponential moving average of the context-encoder parameters. The use of an exponential moving average target-encoder has proven essential for training JEAs with Vision Trans- formers

* Well. that's interesting. Not sure why they would do something like that.
  * A: answer the question here when you understand the answer. Don't just copy paste stuff please!
  *