---
title: What Has a Foundation Model Found? Using Inductive Bias to Probe for World Models
arxiv: 2507.06952
status: published
template: freeform
---

* Foundation models apparently fail to generalize to newtonian tasks when tested. Not sure what that means.&#x20;
* What does it mean for a foundation model to understand newtonian mechanics or kepler's laws of motion? The authors finetune an existing foundation model on a couple of datasets to find the answer to this question that no one seems to have asked.&#x20;
* Maybe we're trying to cater to the fact that existing model's fail to understand physics? But they're pattern matching machines though....
* Definitions:&#x20;
  * A dataset is given by $D\=\[(x\_1, y\_1), (x\_n, y\_n)....(x\_n, y\_n)]$ where x denotes inputs and y denotes outputs.&#x20;
  * A foundation model is a learning algorithm that returns a prediction function $m\_D: X \rightarrow Y$ that relates the input to the output.
  * The underlying world model is summarized by a state space $\phi$ and a mapping that associates each input with a state.&#x20;

> A world model is a restriction on the possible functions from inputs to outputs: only those that obey its state structure are possible. A foundation model that has learned the postulated world model should have an inductive bias towards functions that obey the world model's state structure.

* The authors introduce an inductive bias probe to assess whether a foundation model can fit a postulated world model. It does so by running the foundation model through a bunch of synthetic datasets.&#x20;
* If a foundation model fits a larger world model, it should obey the following properties:&#x20;
  * For any 2 inputs that have the same state mapping, the foundation model should also predict the same output.&#x20;
  * For any 2 inputs that have different state mappings, the foundation model should produce different predictions.&#x20;
* But what functions are these probes? The authors define some functions and properties:&#x20;
  * Extrapolative predictability, a fancy way of denoting how predictable is one prediction based on previous predictions.&#x20;
  * They calculate the above term on an oracle foundation model, which was given access to the original state space $\phi$ and admissible functions G.&#x20;
  * The inductive bias probe compares the extrapolative predictability to that of the oracle.&#x20;
* **According to their results, transformers have low inductive bias towards newtonian mechanics. They note that transformers recovers a different law of gravitation depending on the slice of data it is applied to.**
  * Data wise, they collected a bunch of random samples for planetary motion and trained a 100M transformer on it. They finetuned it on 100 synthetic datasets.&#x20;
  * They want to test it by the deterministic nature of newtonian mechanics. They claim that the model wasn't able to generalize to the law correctly.

## Questions

1. Why is mamba performing better than the transformer?&#x20;
2. What if they used a different architecture for the transformer? Like a BERT style encoder and a normal decoder? Would that help?&#x20;
3. The whole paper's premise seems iffy to me, what if we tried this on a JEPA style model? Like wouldn't that be a tighter test for "world modelability"?&#x20;